I mean I think there's also a false
assumption here on both sides which is
very closely parallels on the debate in
veganism all the time the personal
choice fallacy this is just a personal
choice so you know kind of one side
tends to say well this is just a person
choice it's just up to the individual to
decide what not the one have kids and
then the other side will say no no no
you're beholden to the world ecology etc
you have to make a decision that
reflects world of a population
hello Olympics and the truth in this
case is actually someone between
politics matters local government policy
matters you know etc government policy
if you're encouraging people to have as
many kids as possible or as few as
possible even if it isn't enforced with
prison sentences it matters if this has
outcomes and this is in the middle you
know so yes to some extent it's a
personal choice even here in China some
people make the choice to have two kids
or five kids
my cousin flew to America every second
kids right some people run away or dead
more kids but obviously a lot cheaper
you can walk across the border here you
can escape from China into northern
Myanmar have more kids there people
still make those decisions as
individuals so that's always immature to
some extent but then also collectively
and politically you know we make a
decision as governments and countries
some governments are more democratic
than others you know about how many kids
people ought to have then how we're
going to pursue that goal unless you
know the truth is in that sense that one
winner
this video opens with the usual caveat
if I look exhausted it's because I am
exhausted I got way too damn little
sleep last night but nevertheless for
just $1 a month on patreon I answer your
questions I got a series of questions
and comments on patreon from a supporter
who pays just $1 to make this channel
what it is or to stop it from ceasing to
exist or to stop it from turning into a
series of fitness and lifestyle videos
bread baking videos what thanks anyway
join patreon pay the $1.00 if you want
to talk to me and you too will get this
this kind of service but here I am
taking some time in my day just to
respond to patreon supporter who made a
reasonable request that I should make a
video stating what I think about 18 Adel
ISM in districtís says that wasn't what
our what our earlier video was about and
he sent some links to YouTube channels
that he follows that he feels make a
rational well reasoned case well proven
case for antenatal ism in the strictest
sense of the term
look guys I recently had a series of
conversations with charming young
youtuber named ask yourself and in them
I pointed out you know while we were
having conversation the difference
between his mode of reasoning and mine
again and again he was asking questions
at a kind of nebulous abstract level of
what is the ideal what is the what is
the ideal goal the ideal outcome for
example in reference to First Nations
like whoa okay so what's the ideal
situation for a language like curry or a
jib boy or a mohawk and in my responses
I was consciously and intentionally
refusing to do that I was working from
the ground up I was working from
real-world facts I was respond to that
by not telling him what my ideal was
what objective was but by saying well
look here are some puris in particular
real world facts you have to hear
something you don't know here's some
that really matters here's why the
problem is the way it is and why I'm
talking about problem solving the way
I'm talking about it
this isn't always the case but very
often these kinds of discussions which
are ultimately about politics that are
ultimately about government policy those
who approach it from the top down from
the conceptual and abstract level look
like fools compared to those who
approach it
from the ground up from real-world
political examples real-world political
experience if you want to talk about
effective population control there are
two examples in real-world political
science that matter the two most
overwhelming moats are the most
significant examples in history of the
world are China and Iran and there are
two totally different examples of
government policy to constrain
population growth in China the one-child
policy was based on coercion and
violence in Iran and it only lasted for
a few years but was unbelievably
effective the Iranian intervention
against population by excess population
growth is considered the most effective
mr. world it was instead more like
getting a driver's license Iran has a
culture that's really hung up on
marriage you know it's not like it's not
like people have a relaxed attitude
towards having kids out of wedlock in
Iran everyone is part men as well as
women they really want to get married
and I said okay if you want to get
married just like getting a driver's
license you have to get a marriage
license and you have to come in for a
series of educational sessions and
bonded I'll write a test you have to
qualify to get married and have kids and
in those sessions the educated people
they talk them through the economics of
look here's what happens if you have
seven kids here's what happens you have
five kids
here's what happens if you have two kids
or just one and the very clear point was
if you have large families you are
locking yourself into a life of poverty
you're destroying your children's
prospects for education and career these
are the implications in the real world
looking ahead for the next century and
it had this unbelievable impact so all
of the United Nations projections for
Iran's population growth which by the
way are made by real demographers people
with PhDs and demography and economics
people know what they're doing that all
of these projections for Iran facing a
huge population crisis because they had
a culture that valorized large families
they had a culture that regarded woman
women as good and great if they had
seven kids and five kids would that
really was their culture in a major way
and with just a few years of government
policy that radically changed and
instead the dominant culture in Iran
became okay - kids - kids maximum it
just it just created a pragmatic social
awareness and again so if you're
actually studying this from the ground
up the
world of political science then these
are the two most important examples in
this well of course there will be a
couple of others to pick and choose from
but again Iran and China are huge
countries they're not countries with an
unlimited budget not in that period of
time we're talking about China's much
wealthier now than it was just a few
decades ago these were countries with
limited resources facing a terrible
crisis in terms of overpopulation and in
two very different ways one really
involving coercion and one not so much
but you know but also very different
cultural context they very successfully
intervened to constrain population
growth now if you did not pose the
question in terms of antinatalism but in
terms of how do we effectively constrain
population growth or how do we achieve
negative population growth because a
one-child policy by definition if if
families are having a maximum of one
child per family and of course some
percentage of people are going to choose
to have zero instead of one absolutely
by definition that's gonna that's going
to lead to a plummeting population
within within one generation you know
you know if you have a two-child policy
again in reality you know if you have a
maximum of two children per family in
reality you will have a more gradual
decline in population so yes I am very
sympathetic towards those those policy
goals stated as political science policy
goals not stated as antenatal philosophy
as I think we cannot - I totally
categorically reject antenatal aasif II
both in terms of ecology in terms
everything else but if you're talking
realpolitik if we're just talking about
a world where government decisions
matter and change people's lives and
she's the fate of the world change the
future this is what we're talking about
and sure again it'll be different in
different countries but if I mean if
you're in a third world country like
Laos and you decide well we now want a
constrained population growth which for
a long time they didn't again politics
matters Laos was under populated when I
was there it was under populated because
somebody's country because her country
it States of America bombed the [ __ ] out
of it they dropped more bombs on Laos
and they dropped on Germany and Japan
combined during World War two Laos is
normally ranked as the most heavily
bombed country history of the world that
was obliterated
war and I lived in part of Laos that was
completely depopulated by the Americans
where they went from village to village
and removed all the population where the
population was actually reduced to zero
and then they were in a struggle to
repopulate so those are those are
particularly situations and I talked to
government officials in Laos who talked
about that they actually had a policy in
Laos you could get a free vasectomy or
free hysterectomy you could get you know
that kind of intervention but only if
you had four children so the government
was encouraging people look if you've
had four kids then come in and get an
operation for free you know manna the
woman or whatever never never had more
kids because they didn't support people
having seven kids and nine kids my own
father had nine kids by the way in case
you think white people don't do that
[ __ ] um you know it's this is not a
problem that only exists in Africa or
only exists in Southeast Asia my father
was a white man and then got a vasectomy
clap-clap
a responsible choice after his ninth kid
which was me anyway look you know so
their policy was look the country is
actually crucially under populated due
to this recent history of warfare and
poverty and what have you and so they
want to recover the population but even
then they didn't want people having more
than four kids per family because they
recognized it led to basically an
education that deficit I guess you could
say I don't know even a nutrition
deficit but if a parent of parental care
deficit when you have nine kids how much
care can you possibly abort each one how
much can you invest in their education
or just even pay attention to them let
me tell you my father never knew my
birthday the level the amount of space
in his brain for each of his nine kids
was very limited very so I you know uh
the the parental neglect becomes a
problem I would I would say after one
kid you know I've you've heard me say
this in the recent videos I think I
think one is enough or one every ten
years we're gonna have two kids spacing
out by at least ten years or something
well that's that's my personal that's
just a down-to-earth thing that's not
one of these nebulous top-down
idealistic philosophies such as
antinatalism claims to be so again
everything I've just stated we're coming
to now dealing with antinatalism and
it's in a strictest sense none of this
is ante natal list you know whether it's
the track government of China that
formerly enforced a strict one-child
policy it's now been upgraded to a
two-child policy you know and it is done
through coercion or it's the government
of Iran having a kind of licensing
scheme which can didn't last for that
many years but transform the culture
transform the attitudes of the whole
country and at the unbelievable
measurable impact on their actual birth
rates and their actual current
population and their levels of education
it impacted exactly all those things
that was supposed to impact those are
real-world political science tools that
we have that we can use right now and in
any given country it's a hard decision
to make it's actually not easy for me to
say I remember debating this in Cambodia
whether or not it is a good time for
Cambodia to try to cut off population
growth variety of very complex reasons
it's not easy to say in the case of
Canada or Japan Japan is now in a
downward population spiral what should
be the government policy now should they
cope with this
however fundamentally those real-world
policy choices I'm sympathetic to I
think they matter and those are choices
that we make not just for ourselves not
just selfishly that's delusion that
having a kid is just about your own
self-indulgence or pleasure or something
you know their questions they're their
questions we have to ask in terms of
what kind of society do we want to have
what kind of people do we want to be in
the future what kind of nation do want
to be in the future and also sure what
kind of planet do what I have in the
future absolutely and I think you know
anyone in the right mind for any given
country well again I can't generalize
because the situation allows is not the
same situation Canada but you know in a
situation like Canada the United Kingdom
or something it may well be you do the
research you didn't run the numbers and
it's like well we should maybe have a
maximum of three children per family
because we have a significant percentage
of people we're gonna choose zero and
you've got a hash out all those numbers
you've got to really do the math you've
got to really do the study you know
maybe it's a three child maximum in each
country it's gonna be something
different but even Laos they're not
telling people to have nine
even in a situation of the country being
obliterated they're talking about four
kids is enough and I remember sir one of
the government officials said when
parents ask why the doc this is this is
government policy
they said remember you can have three of
your children died in one motorcycle
accident I think you see the reality of
that even here you often have three
people crowded onto one motorbike so
they should have four kids
because maybe three to four died on one
and one motorbike accident
ouch all right so look antinatalism per
se by contrast I think is a very easily
refuted and ultimately silly ideology
I'm a nihilist I'm an historical
nihilist I can deal with these questions
that just have done on a pragmatic level
government policy political science but
if you're stating this as an ideal
probably the most honest school of 80
nihilism is the the antinatalism is the
the vehement school of V HEMT the
voluntary human extinction movement
because they say what they would really
like to see is basically the decline of
disappearance of the human race if
that's not your position in antinatalism
then maybe you need to clarify you
actually are just so much who wants
something like China's one-child policy
or Iran's more education if that's your
case then you're not really an antenatal
as' but true antenatal ism is that
you're aiming for the you know
exponential diminishment of the human
race of the absolute disappearance
leaving race through people you know
refusing to reproduce the actual
arguments I see are deeply flawed even
in terms of ecology well okay I should
state again I want to keep this very
much in the first person
okay I'll first state objectively why
it's flawed I don't know if you've seen
these statistics whether it's for water
footprint or for air pollution you know
this guy just wrote to me saying well a
vegan still has 0.9 9090 percent as much
negative environmental impact as a
meat-eater I'm sorry my dude but a kid
who grows up in Lesotho Africa does not
have 0.9 of the impact of an American
kid a Cambodian kid does not have 0.9 of
the impact of an American kid it's
unbelievable how much worse the
environmental impact is of being born in
and growing up in United States of
America
compared to Lazaro Africa or Cambodia
Laos and again when you break down the
numbers it's really sad what the crucial
things aren't through person in fact
someone that someone who literally works
on a rice farm their entire lives and
will never own a car and will never fly
in an airplane ever you know the
specific type of upper atmosphere air
pollution from an airplane is really
crucial these are what really drive the
numbers this is what really inflates
your your ecological impact and that is
that's sad and interesting and you can
look at those numbers but you know I
mean it's interesting basically these
specific antenatal lists are saying that
vegans Ernie on an ego trip because we
maybe just have a 10% better impact on
the environment compared to other white
Western people living in decadence
that's I mean that's interesting I
sympathize with where you're coming from
then there but your your conclusion is
that we shouldn't have children at all
on on an abstract level the thinking
here goes and this this may be true of
some of you watching the video the
thinking here goes that ecology consists
of self-abnegation and my model of
ecology is not based on self application
not at all
my model of ecology is not based on
minimizing my impact in the world it's
based on maximizing my impact in the
world and now there are some other
vegans on YouTube you can take this
argument too so if you take this to mod
vegan mod vegan identifies as a
minimalist and she's someone who's
really concerned about using a
recyclable glass jar a reasonable glass
jar instead of using a plastic jar she's
interested in zero right a zero waste
lifestyle she's really concerned about
the bristles on her on her toothbrush
removing the bristles from her
toothbrush and biodegrading the
toothbrush handle and this kind of stuff
she is approaching ecology and for some
people this is the first premise that
brings them to veganism as an extension
her principle is to look at the human
being as the center of a chart with a
circle around it and the circle
indicates harm or negative impacts and
if trying to shrink down that circle as
much as possible that is not my
perspective at all I've said this in
videos but I think more than one year
ago I remember doing podcasts on this I
see myself in the center of that circle
and if you ask me okay so aisel you're
going
run for election for the Green Party
quite a likely scenario actually you're
gonna run for election for mayor or
governor or provincial Parliament or
whatever it is you're running for an
election do you want to minimize your
environmental impact by refusing to take
a single airplane why don't you just do
the whole campaign over Skype I'll just
do political lectures over said I'll do
I'll do a zero-waste political campaign
I won't use I won't use any disposable
drink containers no [ __ ] that
[ __ ] you I'm leading a meaningful life
in pursuit of meaningful goals where I
want to have the maximum positive impact
so I'm gonna get on that plane I'm gonna
burn that [ __ ] jet fuel I'm gonna
take that helicopter from town to town
across Canada and I'm gonna drink
Gatorade out of disposable bottles I
hate Gatorade
so is it the only thing that's vegan and
I'm gonna throw them in the [ __ ]
garbage and you will know me by the
trail of dead behind me I'm gonna burn
and pillage I'm gonna light the forest
and burn it down and you're gonna see
the red glow and the smoke rising over
the horizon
this is high-impact political reality
and I'm gonna struggle to the maximum
impact because I really believe that you
should vote for me and even if I can't
win the election the Green Party it's
very rare for them to win an election
I really think my message in politics is
worth getting across I really want to
have that impact I want to take it from
town to town I want to do that my life
isn't something meaningless I'm stuck in
a pattern of making excuses for my life
isn't something I'm gonna apologize for
trying to minimize my negative impact
for I'm telling you I actually believe
in the positive effects I'm having with
this specific project with running for
government and I I have no doubt in my
mind that this justifies a hundred
disposable plastic bottles going in the
landfill or whatever but the forest
trail of dead
jet fuel being spent etc that's my
message is don't get stuck in a
mentality of minimizing your collateral
damage maximize your collateral damage
but believe in the goals you're pursuing
now by the same token I don't believe in
downhill skiing my girlfriend when she
first kind of met me was a little bit
shocked to that she's like why are you
so why
are you so much against skiing why do
you deem that ski I don't believe in
that [ __ ] at all there are people who
take helicopters to go downhill skiing
that's quite common in Canada they take
a helicopter to the top of the mountain
there are people of course take airplane
tickets they fly across the country go
to Banff and go skiing there are people
who use up jet fuel and alcohol and
marijuana and cocaine going skiing
skiing in Canada is a big part of the
unexamined life and I'm against all of
it okay no there are a lot of things in
life I think are meaningless
self-indulgence and they don't justify
the air you're breathing and the urine
you're putting into the sewage system
the jet fuel or any of the rest of it
for sure but you know if you're looking
at the impact of bombing Mosel you what
do you want to evaluate well you know
these US soldiers and Mosel they're
using a lot of disposable plastic
bottles yet they're also putting bullets
through people's head okay
the question we want to ask here is is
it right or wrong is it good or bad to
be putting bullets through people's
heads to try to shut down Isis an
international terrorist organization and
a part of a civil war and a you know
separatist political movement Isis is
what it is do we or do we not want to
pursue the elimination of Isis and the
conquest of Mosul and all costs at any
cost at what cost those are the
real-world political science questions
would ask am I willing to run for the
Green Party run for election in Canada
and all cost at any cost at what cost
those are the questions we go to ask and
they're all about pursuit of a
meaningful objective and then the the
Empowered have the maximum impact in
order to pursue that objective now of
course actually by the way the
ecological impacts of war are terrible
but this is the world I live in and this
is the world I understand it when people
take this mouthy part of me mouth the
attitude mousy mousy attitude like I'm
this dot in the middle of this chart and
all I can do is go live in a cave and
recycle my [ __ ] toothbrush and this
kind of [ __ ] you're stepping aside so
the Joseph Stalin's of the world are on
that podium
okay the real tragedy of human history
is that Joseph Stalin and people like
Joseph Stalin end up in power again and
again and again evil happens because
good people aren't are not stood up and
heard they're not good people who stand
up and put their lives on the line
for if we're being all the way real
about it okay the struggle is real the
struggle is terrible
the struggle for ecology is a political
struggle period and I do not subscribe
it all to the view that the most impact
you can have especially not if you live
in a liberal Western democracy that the
most impact you can have is by deleting
yourself from the census or deleting
your child from the census if you really
believe that
think about what a [ __ ] terrible
character judgment you've just made on
yourself do you really believe you are
such a piece of [ __ ]
that all you can do is minimize your
impact as a consumer why the [ __ ] can't
you do more now look some people I mean
you know maybe you're so disabled
physically or mentally look like my
heart goes under there are some people
who probably are so disabled one of my
one of my fans you know one less person
failure he's in a wheelchair but he's
still out there doing vegan activism you
know I mean some people you know he's
out there literally handing out
pamphlets on his campus and he writes to
me sometimes about how tough it is so
you know but there are people there are
some people I got one brother who's so
disabled he can't say a single word in
English he's totally disabled he's a
total ward of the state or whatever you
know you know but I mean there are some
people are so disabled that may be true
of there's no way they can have a
positive impact in that struggle okay
peace is an illusion peace is the shadow
of war okay you may think you live as as
just a consumer looking at the bottom
line looking at this equation of how
much you can subtract from your clutch
limp that you're not this is the war of
all against all baby and you know who
who's gonna define the politics of the
21st century and the 22nd century if you
want to stay in your cave and let Donald
Trump do it or let the next Joseph
Stalin do it [ __ ] you go out get on the
airplane get on the campaign trail and
if you've got to burn some plastic water
bottles to do it find a project find a
way so you can make this crucial
difference in the world and I think you
should be committed to it and willing to
make willing to make those willing to
make those impacts this is a
motivational video obviously I'm
obviously being a bit you know a bit
provocative I have been in the situation
where I was part of a Nicola sorry
pardon me
I was part of a humanitarian project
that nevertheless had some negative
ecological impacts it was trying to have
positive ones actually you know like you
know we were involved in agriculture we
were involved in people starving to
death
food security providing food and what I
do there were over ecological questions
but you know in the real world when
you're looking at the real balance of
what your project is you say okay we're
trying to help these people not starve
to death we're trying to improve their
agriculture but you do actually have to
sit there and look at the balance of
what you're doing and say how many
people are we putting on
intercontinental flights and is it worth
it and in those villages the other
people is working with more not vegan
talking about a poverty-stricken village
there was a horrible ecologic Olympic
visible just from having a bunch of
foreign experts like you pay some
technical experts in forestry and
agricultural science to come to a small
village and Laos and they're all eating
beef every day and you could see it
you'd see the blood in the river the
blood and the people in the river from
the the animals being slaughtered to
feed the rich foreigners who'd come
there to help people in a you know in a
humanitarian project you know for real
when you're designing a humanitarian
project and when you're designing a
political project there are responsible
decisions you can make that are gonna
limit or minimize the ecological impact
while still maximizing the positive
impact you're in pursuit of there's no
doubt and I'm sure you know probably the
Green Party does it when you're
designing your coast-to-coast tour
they're responsible choices you can make
about airplanes versus taking a bus
versus hitchhiking and you could be a
cute thing too maybe you fly some of the
stops and then you hitchhike down the
road and you film it and put it on
YouTube and say hey in order to save
some jet fuel in order to minimize our
impact we're doing this you know in
humanitarian projects or political
projects yes what I despise is the
profound assumption that you are nothing
but a passive consumer in this equation
and therefore all you can do is be as
passive as possible and unified Syria
fact as a consumer as much as possible
you're not you're not those same
statistics that show that someone in
Africa who's never going to ride a car
and never gonna fly in an airplane has
so much less of an ecological impact and
that you have so much you can ecological
impact guess what on a global scale
you're part of the
and you may not think of yourself as the
power lead but the fact that you're in a
country where you can lobby Parliament
where you can go to City Hall where you
can change the world we can't can't have
these these these kinds of impacts in a
lot of ways compared to that person who
may have seven kids because on their
farm that's the only labour they have is
employing their own children to engage
in subsistence agriculture that still
exists on planet Earth you know if
talking about remote parts of Papua New
Guinea or some parts of Africa and so on
in South America there's still real
poverty there's still people who are in
that who are in that category no this is
not a case where we want to build an
ideology starting from the raw statistic
of world population and work down and
it's not a situation where you should
think of yourself as a vampire sucking
the blood at a planet Earth who's trying
to put yourself out of minimal diet try
to cut down on how much you're you're
sucking of the ecology if that's what
your life really is and that's who you
really are you have to change but I
think fundamentally this antinatalism is
basically in ideologies for self pitying
video game players who you know don't
want to deal with the political reality
I talked about in the first 10-15
minutes of this video they don't really
want to deal with the ecological reality
and they don't want to take on an active
role of fighting this war whether it's
the war against Isis or the role for
fundamental you know ecological change
the war however you see it to make the
world a better place to change things
here and now for the future but as soon
as you take on any goals like that as
soon as you become a goal oriented
person then you're not just talking
about the dot in the middle and remove
reducing the halo of harm that you're
doing you're not thinking about this in
terms of harm reduction you're looking
at a balance because now there are two
dots on the map right there's you and
there's the harm you're doing and
there's the positive outcome you're in
pursuit of whether that's helping
starving people trying to prevent Korean
age away from going extinct running for
the Green Party or trying to conquer
Mosul whatever it is now you've got a
goal and now instead of harm reduction
and trying to have zero kids and trying
to use zero plastic or whatever it is
now you're saying okay how do I get from
here to there as fast as possible with
as big an impact as possible making the
most change I can make making the most
positive change we can
and how can I in a responsible way
obviously eliminate irresponsible waste
and harm to get from here to there I
actually got one comment saying that
Melissa contributes a lot because she
has such expressive eyes well so that's
that's one of your fair nice nice thing
to say but you were just saying to me
that in terms of both antinatalism and
ecology and the kind of the question of
the impacts of her daily life you know a
turning point for you was watching
cowspiracy there's always a turning
point for this youtube channel wasn't
really a turning point for me and like
my private life of beliefs and that
before that to some extent maybe you
knew about this
you know conceptual apps web but you
were in denial about it yeah yeah like I
knew about environmental impacts from
using your car like you know just
everyday everyday things like traveling
on an airplane and I was and I felt
really helpless about it I remember
talking to multiple family members and I
made like a Facebook post I was like you
know what can I even do at this point
like I feel like I I don't like as you
were talking about in your last video um
you know my family does ski and so you
know when I was a kid you know I was
involved in these ski trips but like as
an adult I didn't travel and endlessly I
was really living a frugal lifestyle
before I was vegan and I I wasn't
earning that much money to begin with
but even if I had been I would have been
fiscally responsible and like not gone
on extravagant vacations or like just
been wasteful in general like I I knew
not to be wasteful and if I could have
had an electric car or something like
that you know in the Motor City you kind
of have to have a car but um so yeah
like I I had known that there were there
was a lot of environmental impact that I
could be reducing and but like I felt
like helpless like what what can I
possibly do at this point and then when
I watched house tears I was like oh well
I can go vegan that's pretty right
that's pretty simple I think I think
it's baby I think one of most boring
things you said they're a little bit too
brief em it was just the few
of hopelessness right there like before
you felt view found veganism in looking
at those facts and factors you felt
hopeless in beholding yeah well what are
you gonna do just minimize the harm by
you know by minimizing your airplane
flights and so on what what is
everything that yet yeah I mentioned
video about having kids like that I did
look on child freed like the subreddit I
mean like I said there's an awful [ __ ]
some people yeah logical approach 19:8
ilysm like we just watched a video that
was recommended by somebody on patreon
about antinatalism and it was a comedian
like it was a clip from a comedian's
show but it was really abrasive and just
terrible to hear like somebody's the the
antenatal this perspective can be really
just awful like the worst of human
nature to say like that you should
insist that other people shouldn't have
kids you know like and that we should
all just die off like that that is such
a negative way to view human life but
like you know I can I can definitely
sympathize because at the time I was
looking for ways to minimize my impact
and I also was already thinking of not
having kids and like trying to think oh
you know I was planning on not having
kids and I was trying to reassure myself
that this was the right decision and
this was another reason why it was a
good decision because it reduces your
environment environmental impact and
that bolstered my opinion on being like
powerful this is the right thing to do
and and I can't see like another
argument that a lot of people made was
that it was selfish to have kids and
like there's this and I know that's just
so irrelevant to me and people have kids
for all kinds of different reasons right
yeah we want to do measure the value of
the delusions of parents some people are
selfish and some people that some people
are absurdly altruistic and it's it's
just as absurd I know yeah there are
definitely some people that have kids
for some selfish reasons I'm sure that's
not the only reason you but um anyway
yeah I sorry this is like this is not
really cool directed and it's kind of
kind of aimless talking with you about
like it's an issue care about more
keeping Rihanna that's what YouTube's
all about I mean you know I think one of
the questions here obviously is what
society do you want to be a part of and
it's not that we have no choice if
anyone who can afford an airplane ticket
you have limited choice right like you
know there's a real alternative here you
can be a part of China with its
one-child policy which has now been
amended to be a two shell policy by the
way you can
it's your choice right now I'm living in
China it's not that hard you know if you
want to live in a country with strict
population controls and see the
advantage of that you can move to China
I mean you know part of what I have to
say is you know China's one-child policy
works it's brutal and it has negative
impacts we know someone personally here
who really suffered she had an abortion
that she really didn't enjoy that she
really regrets but because she already
had one child that's the Jewish she was
in you know and also because she was a
government employee by the way because
the pressure on you was more actually
supposed to be a member of the Communist
Party then you know the consequences are
higher she would have lost her job as
well as being punished if she had a
second kid ya know it's based on
coercion but it works and I and there
were people who both philosophically
morally really support China's one-child
policy I I say it's imperfect but it
works antenatal is bulge it does not you
know antenatal isms well so I think
that's not but China's much hopefully
you have a choice and no no no but just
just one more to include Japan if you
want to live in a country that's going
through demographic collapse you know
your shrink population you can move to
Japan you can at least visit you
couldn't you can live there and it's
different you know I'm not I'm not gonna
say Japan is bad there were good things
about and there are bad things about but
that's a contrast in society do you
think people in Japan are less selfish
then cultures that have lunch family
Japan it's an incredibly selfish culture
but it's a low birthrate culture it's a
culture where you know they're there
they're dipping below the replacement
rate for births and you can see all that
means including going out to the
countryside where you go to towns and
countries it's all elderly people it's
all elderly people and people on
temporary migrant worker visas you know
they get in some people in the
Philippines and from China to do to do
jobs and it's it's a bit bleak and
depressing but you know sure those are
you can see it you can live it you know
you have some choice and they're looking
looking to your own future if you're
from Canada you know to what extent you
want the future Canada to be like China
the what
that you want it to be like Japan to
what extent you want to be like Iran
talked about in the other video you know
there there were countries that have
different systems of population planning
and public education and and different
you know different realities coming out
of that I think those are reasonable
questions to ask and reasonable ways to
challenge yourself whereas the kind of
antenatal aesthetic we've seen is in
many ways unreasonable yeah it's not
convincing anybody else other than
people who are you know it seems like
this was just preaching to people who
are already under this belief that
having kids is selfish it's like like
why is this even a an argument it's not
well that that's also I mean look I mean
again I come out of a you know nihilist
background and philosophers like Max
Turner and so on I mean any argument
that says well my opponents are only
self-interested it's kind of a dead end
it's kind of so what you know oh well
America is only bombing Mosul you know
is only attacking Isis for America's
self-interest so what like you think you
think you've missed the argument as
opposed to America is bombing another
country out of altruism or to benefit
some other country like you cost me so
lots you know so I'm just saying though
any of those arguments I find just
implicitly observed or self-defeating
yeah right exactly
just something that he was saying in the
video that we were just watching is that
like you don't know for sure if your
child will turn out to be vegan even if
you want to raise them to begin in the
same sense if somebody has a kid
and they don't have any clear direction
on what they want their child to grow up
being um it's possible their child will
grow up to be a really positive member
of society like sure you know your
father had a lot of children and I'm
sure he didn't like have a plan for all
them but you know I feel like the world
is better for you being in it oh thanks
babe yeah you know I can't necessarily
say that I don't know your eight
siblings but probably probably a small
percentage of my brothers and sisters or
decent human beings but sure yes yeah so
and you know we were just talking a
couple weeks ago we had you know I
raised this question because in one of
the discord chats like people were
talking about this book about
antinatalism
and I was thinking like in the past I
thought like oh the people that
shouldn't be having kids are having a
lot of kids are you know yeah you said
be under this impression but like right
um you know you can't you can't say like
because the parents shouldn't be having
kids that the kid won't turn out to be a
decent member of society or like try not
to beat somebody well I mean I think
there's also a false assumption here on
both sides which is very closely
parallel design we debate in veganism
all the time the personal choice fallacy
this is just a personal choice so you
know kind of one side tends to say well
this is just a personal choice it's just
up to the individual to decide whether
or not that when I have kids and then
the other side will say no no no you're
beholden to the world ecology etc you
have to make a decision that reflects
world overpopulation ecological impacts
and the truth in this case is actually
somewhere in between politics matters
local government policy matters you know
etc we were talking about an economic
issue recently and I remember I just
said to you I said look you know it
really matters whether the government is
encouraging companies to pay their
employees minimum wage to grind down
wages or if you have a government that
maybe not even through explicit laws but
is is constantly pushing people as Bill
Clinton did and so on you know actually
to raise wages to invest more in people
and education and skills where the
government policy to say no we encourage
what's called an economics the virtuous
cycle of upward productivity and upward
wages and the wages should reflect in
that when there are improvements in
productivity or profitability that the
worker should be paid more that you
shouldn't be quieting in wages
those kinds of government policies
matter now likewise government policy if
you're encouraging people to have as
many kids as possible or as few as
possible even if it isn't enforced with
prison sentences it matters if this has
outcomes and this is in the middle you
know so yes to some extent it's a
personal choice even here in China some
people make the choice to have two kids
or five kids and just pay the fines and
go to prison and some grunt across the
border here they escape to Myanmar they
want to have more kids so they leave
China
worker she said her cousin flew to
America to have her second kid right
right so some people run away under more
kids but obviously it's not cheaper you
can just walk across the border here you
can escape from China into northern
Myanmar and have more kids there people
still make those decisions as
individuals so that's always immature to
some extent but then also collectively
and politically you know we make a
decision as governments and countries
some governments are more democratic
than others you know about how many kids
people ought to have then how we're
gonna pursue that goal I mean that's you
know the truth is in that sense
somewhere between yeah so the other
thing that we were talking about the
other day like I guess the premise of
this book that was linked is that
because life is so miserable most of the
time like right we have it's better it's
better not to exist at all basically
right yeah yeah you see yeah like you've
said that's that's easily refutable
because to you life is not about
enjoyment life is not about happiness
right so that is actually right that is
actually a profound argument that I
forgot about today you're right yeah
yeah so you know you shouldn't in the
same way you can be led to madness by
thinking of reducing your impacts
environmental impact to zero I think you
can be driven to madness by making your
life as happy as possible we're like
trying to say because life is miserable
let's just end it all like that to me
that that is madness like well why would
you say this I don't know it's a really
weird thing for because you know many
vegans not all that many that I see on
the Internet identify positively with
utilitarianism and this is a weird case
where I like rejects antinatalism for
the same reason for some of the same
reasons I reject utilitarianism which is
that no I don't see life about the
pursuit of pleasure and avoiding
suffering I see the truth I see life in
the phone way you're going to suffer the
choice you have to make is between
meaningful suffering and meaningless
suffering and now I really feel having a
child a child not ten not five having a
child one is a lot more meaningful than
skiing it's a lot more meaningful than
playing
video games it's a lot more meaningful
than cocaine and you know again I think
doing humanitarian work in Laos and
Cambodia is more meaningful than what I
could have done in Canada at that time
that phase of my life and actually the
reverse is true now I think the
political difference I could make in
Canada you know through our demo is more
meaningful than any difference I could
make in Cambodia Laos
so I actually that's an interesting
double example but once you have one of
these missions once there is something
meaningful you're you're trying to
accomplish suffer go out there and
suffer yeah sure life is suffering and
brace it but I think it's totally false
to bring that object like Oh huh so
their question is how do we minimize
suffering and some people answer this
way some people answer that way in terms
of utilitarianism and the antenatal
assay we'll the way to minimize
suffering is to minimize life itself not
the easiest Segway I can understand you
know if you have a kid it's it would be
pretty hard to explain to them some of
these adult concepts about why the world
is in the state it is and of course this
I think this would be even more
difficult in World War two you know
explain music it's what was going on and
like why the Holocaust was happening you
know and this in in the same way like
you have to explain to your children
like these horrible things that happen
in the past and what's happening now how
we can improve like there's a certain
amount that that is kind of awful the
the idea of having to teach your kids
like that life is suffering like more
often than not so like basically where
I'm going with this is I can understand
like why people would be like you know
the world is in a shitty condition life
is tough life is hard so why bring
another life into it to experience this
I could sympathize with that like yeah
you know so we talked to the world war
two couple weeks ago and I actually got
quite emotional because you were asking
me the hypothetical
question if you were alive at that time
and these kind of circumstances what we
do and for me it is emotional cuz I you
know over my life and total I've done a
lot of research on that period of
history and I said you look I mean you
know this is one of the reasons why I'm
kind of well this is one of the reasons
why having a son is kind of harder for
me than having a daughter because I
think especially with a son because the
reality of military service and someone
is what it is the reality of civil war
is very gender unequal but I said look
you know like I really dread having to
teach my son look there are some
circumstances where you have to give up
all the bourgeois comforts of life and
go to the jungle or go to the cave and
join the resistance and it's you know
it's war its war to the knife you know
it's but you don't yes you know my
answer is if I was alive at that time I
probably would have died you know I
would have had to and even those choices
are very tough and so if you look at the
reality of the French Resistance you
know there weren't easy moral choices
you know I wouldn't want to join the
Communists just because I'm fighting
against the fascists I wouldn't really
want to join the anarchists either you
know very often the groups you had to
sign up with but we've seen that just
play with the serial so serious the
civil war well if you want to fight
against one side which side of you with
I mean the the choices are often really
bleak and really morally murky but yeah
well I said you know there's some of
these circumstances so extreme that I
feel absolutely the right thing for me
to do if I was an able-bodied person I
would have to you know I would I would
have to immediately go into combat you
know in clandestine combat not even
joining a forum whole army I'd have to
be involved in in guerrilla war now so I
mean that's heavy for me I don't say
that in a flippant way you can tell I'm
not like bragging or something you know
I think that's awful and I know enough
I've done enough historical research
about people who literally lived in a
cave and literally lived in the jungle
have read there were council what that's
like it's it lay your life is suffering
you know but surviving the war is a lot
more suffering than dying in it in a
sense that the dying part is easy you
know then you don't have to plan for
what you're gonna eat the next day you
know and just easy start starvation as
part of war too it's it's grim but but
here's the but sorry here's the buggy's
no I'm saying this but I think there are
other people in that war you know who
are alive at that time who felt like the
most means
the thing they could do was having
raised a child where they saw these
towering you know political figures and
ideologies beyond their control and
beyond the comprehension and they
decided well what I'm gonna do is close
my toe or close my windows and try to
raise my own child to be a good person
and even though I think that's the wrong
decision I can sympathize that decision
and again I live like when I was living
in Laos I was looking around people who
didn't understand politics at all the
people who had no clue and you realize
these people some of them went through
the war in Laos and they literally
didn't know what the word communism
means and they did they have no idea
what the two sides fighting are and for
a lot of them that was the decision was
to say well I can't understand this it's
dangerous all I can do is close my door
and focus on raising my own child to be
a good person and I think in the strict
sense I think that is pathetic
like I think it's a pathetic decision
but it has real pinkos you know what I
mean I can sympathize with that with it
like if you're literally an illiterate
peasant it Laos or maybe you're
illiterate but the language you're
literate and none of this information is
is publishing you're literate in a
indigenous I think minority languages
and allows there's like you know oh
you're only sources of information are a
Christian missionary who's been left
behind by the French Empire and a radio
that just has Pro communist propaganda
it's tough so I do think whether it's
world war two or you know Vietnam or
whatever there were people who made that
choice instead that they weren't gonna
go sign up for a suicide mission
with an ideologies they don't believe in
because the ideology is fighting against
is even worse they said no they're gonna
try to insulate themselves and extricate
themselves and just focus on raising
their own child to be a good person and
for the most part those are the people
who now populate these countries they're
the children of cowards because cowards
survive and cowards are the ones who
have kids and the brave men of principle
like me or run often die and don't have
kids or don't raise them that's part of
the cycle of suffering in this life I
knew a Holocaust survivor I'm not gonna
say to you I knew ten Holocaust I knew
one you know I knew a Holocaust survivor
when I was a kid he was an old man and
one of his
mantris in life something he said again
again I mean he invented it himself you
know somebody else's Provo said he said
survivors are not heroes he said when he
was in the ghetto and Poland or whatever
you know what he would you know he said
the heroes were the guys who stood up
and got shot in the head by the Nazis
the guy they didn't die in the
concentration camps they didn't let
themselves get taken to the Constitution
the heroes were the guys who stood up in
farm photography go through you know
it's it's hard it's extreme but he said
you know the survivors he said are
people like my parents his own parents
he said they were cowards they did
whatever they had to do to survive and
that's why they survived you know I'm
sorry I actually forget it I think his
parents did die in all cost I think I
think they died they just died later and
I just they just live for a few more
years before they died so I don't even
think that's true but you know he said
survivors are not heroes and yeah so
those are those are really hard
decisions and again I mean I guess my
overall light motif I guess we got to
cut off this video because they're both
we pay you know the overall legacy for
this video was I'm against these overly
abstract ideological approaches in the
top-down and what I'm in favor of is the
grassroots empirical bottom-up approach
where we look at political reality of it
and that political reality includes
includes these horrors and that life is
suffering and includes a lot more
something that you said you know who has
suffered less like think of all the past
sure what has happened like what time
better what time is better than now like
sure sure and but for if you're talking
about something like ecology all of this
is kind of directly and indirectly about
ecology if you think about the suffering
that's ahead of us in ecological
politics you can really ask who has
suffered less compared to any of these
you know political calamities in the
past or even the struggle for black
organizing labor and stuff late but in
whether it's labor movements or human
rights movies or anything I mean if you
look ahead even if you think of like the
worst case scenario like I don't know
employees of chemical corporation
beating up ecologic
protesting he does who has suffered less
yeah so yeah that the the suffering
ahead of us
it certainly doesn't I mean again given
that people did have kids when they were
literally living in a cave in Laos and
the US Army was dropping bombs all
around you know I knew one woman who
grew up in a cave in whole and not
ancient times people 1970s you know I
mean those people were committed to
having children and raising them and
educating them and trying to get them a
good quality of education she did she
got a PhD eventually I guess you didn't
whew in the cave but she learned she
learned to read and write and she
studied literature and history and
politics in the cave seriously yeah she
was doing homework they didn't they
didn't just relax because they were in a
cave and the u.s. was dropping bombs and
that's no excuse you still have to do
your homework you know they were they
were still committed to surreal
parenting and [ __ ] right and that's the
resilience the human spread those are
the people who survived the war right
those are the people who carry on the
next generation do right but they're not
heroes they did run away they were in
the cave they're not fighting for a
better tomorrow
they're just escaping for a better
tomorrow you know they're there if
they're literally and figuratively
running away yeah
but ya know there's no comparison we can
say well the struggle we're facing in
terms of ecology is so dire that we
can't possibly have children we have to
take to the hills and join the
resistance or something yeah and even if
it is so I you know I was thinking
something you said about Communist China
how people there would be sweet little
interactions between people like like a
guy would help a woman take out the
garbage or something like that would be
there the extent of their relationship
or something would grow from there
because so many well you know Cuba has
been through periods of time because of
its ridiculous political situation where
they had no gasoline and very little
electricity and so on
I've always felt one of the strengths of
ecology is that even even when you have
no gasoline I think the pleasures that
really matter to people are still there
you know and I'm not saying the
pleasures of studying ancient Greek
philosophy which is something I enjoy me
and 1% of the population enjoy but you
know when there's no gas and there's no
electricity people still get together
and play lie
music that was a huge revival during
that time in Cuba cuz people would just
get together and they'd have garden
parties and they'd play live jazz and oh
they dance and so on because that's
that's what they had you know and there
was actually a whole culture of having
improvised instruments because ruins
they wouldn't have a real drum kit so
they'd make drums out of you know farm
tools you know different things you can
do you know and you know music and sex
and gambling and swimming in the ocean
the pleasures of life that really
mattered people were all there they just
couldn't drive a car to get to and from
them I do think one of the strengths of
an ecological mindset is that so much of
what people really care about not just
the 1% of reading philosophy or care
about politics you know I think they're
still there for people and you know what
she's alluding to is that during the
more extreme periods of poverty in China
here you know if you liked someone you
couldn't give them roses but you could
literally carry their laundry and stuff
like this you could bring them hot water
in a in a thermos
you know these were the gestures this is
the you know these these were the little
forms of generosity and human warmth
that that people use during the the bad
old days the revolution 100 ecological
destruction you know I feel like there
are still little moments and in life
even though life is majority suffering
that make it worth getting through and
making it worth producing another life
to experience right well I think ok I
think another huge issue here that we
can deal with pretty briefly we heard
this stand-up comedian he's an antenatal
estándar comedian talking really about
his hatred for people who choose to have
children now obviously he was he's a
comedian he's exaggerating I mean he is
stating his political view I think one
of the other fundamental problems we
have in in politics is misidentifying
who are your enemies
so if antinatalism is gonna matter if
it's gonna have a future and I don't
really think it does who are your
enemies
the the moderate political position have
pointed out of saying look let's learn
from the experience of China with the
one-child policy let's learn from the
experience of Iran and let's talk about
responsible you know government policy
have to moderate or constrain population
growth or actually have negative
population have to have you know to have
the situation Japan already has of
people having fewer babies than the
replacement race here your populations I
shouldn't decline okay you know we can
have that but who who is your enemy you
know it can't be the standard comedian
made the joke of smashing the windows of
a car because it's a baby seat in the
back you know like you know to express
his hatred you know if your Radiology is
based on the view that the people who
have children are your enemies I think
that really does indicate implicitly how
wrong your ideological approach is and
you know there may be some groups that
are your enemies you know in the United
States there's a religious movement
called the quiver full movement terrible
name but it is Christian the cult or
Christian subculture that's based on
putting emphasis on the the be fruitful
and multiply have as many children as
you possibly can
philosophy just by the internet a guy
wrote to me about a friend of his and
his wife had become a religious maniac
of that kind and he actually secretly
had a vasectomy cuz she had adopted the
few that she should get pregnant of his
nature as she possibly can and I forgot
after they had three kids or something
you know and he lied to her
he just said God doesn't want you to get
pregnant so well I guess it's a sign
from God for something I'm trying not
even you know yeah so you know I'm not
saying you know nobody's your enemy
probably there are specific religious
groups
I can't imagine really secular groups
maybe there are some you know that are
in favor of people having you know more
than two children and more than four
children and maybe you do have to have
education campaigns or even
confrontational political you know
interactions people say no you know it's
not responsible for you to have nine
kids it's particularly horrible when
people see antenatal let's see children
as the enemy it's like man do you have
no like sympathy do you have no ability
to empathize with other creature like it
you know it being gains that's his
stick you know like he hates kids but um
you know reading some of some stuff like
that and hearing people saying that they
hate children
look I think also a lot of these people
are wimps I mean in a very specific
sense you may have met people with
sciatica with spinal conditions okay so
there are people for whom life is
constant suffering in the most direct
physical sense to a physical pain from
their spine their whole lives you know
or intermittent really sharp pain they
have spinal problems maybe not that
condition but there are various spinal
problems that are like that if the best
solution you've got is suicide or not
being born it doesn't doesn't speak well
to your philosophy
now I actually don't live in wrong I
respect the decision all kinds of people
do have medical conditions where they
make the decision to commit suicide or
make the decision to commit suicide when
they reach a certain age and their body
is breaking down I actually I do think
that's an individual decision you can
make but you know the the perspective of
a teenager lists in the strictest sense
again it's really kind of a shallow
ripoff with philosopher Arthur
Schopenhauer or one one aspect of Arthur
Schopenhauer my philosophy is to say
life is suffering life is bad therefore
the way to minimize suffering is not to
live at all and part of my answer as
well is that the best you've got now
again maybe you know maybe there are
some people who there's a very small
minority before him that's true you know
again there are there are terrible
health conditions there are people in
terrible suffering and they can't do
anything about it and they've lost the
ability to lead a meaningful life I've
actually seen some interviews with those
people where they discuss their decision
to commit suicide before doing so I
remember one guy he was losing control
of his body and he decided that when he
lost the ability to talk he would kill
him like he'd already lost a foot he
used his legs and arms I think but he
said okay when I lose the ability of
time I saw one of those progressive one
of those progressive diseases that's
where he decided to draw the line but
there are plenty of people who are mute
and choose to live unfair comparison
what comparisons are odious but you know
you know this is a kind of diagnosis of
the human condition for everyone as
being so crippling and terrible that
yeah and that for everyone that we're
all worse off than someone with sciatica
and there are plenty of people with
medical issues with spinal conditions or
what-have-you
who will say no damn you my life is
worth something I'm accomplishing
something meaningful whatever I paint
pictures I'm a political activist
whatever it is they're doing things they
consider meaningful and you know who are
you to say my life is worthless just
because it has suffering some of us are
tough enough some of us are not wimps
some of us can embrace the significance
of suffering our lives and pursue things
that are meaningful beyond that you know
in spite of that or because of that or
what have you you know you hear that
coming up that attitude that wimpy
attitude like you know there are people
who say like for example in the
prostitution issue there are people are
like oh well like this person shouldn't
live because they have a they have a
shameful you know you know a shameful
profession it comes in it's like well
you know and again I think people just
lack real-world experience you know huge
centers your prostitutes that do that
job for like one year or less one year
maybe even five years there's a brief
period of time and then they go on to
other job in other education and in many
cases they conceal it they keep it
secret whatever job they don't want to
nobody in that job ever knows that this
this past and so on but I mean you know
what what is your judgment on humanity
that people lack the imagination and
initiative to make something positive of
their lives just cuz they have a spinal
condition just cuz they had a period of
life what they did something like a
being a prostitute that they may indeed
feel shame about not all do there are
prostitutes who are proud and say they
feel my shame but whatever or that gives
them a disadvantage let's at least say
that that they're disadvantaged in life
you know it's it's this it's this very
strange mode of reasoning that then
leads to just trying to minimize and
minimize and minimize where life is
being regarded only in terms of what's
bad and then the question is how can we
minimize the the bad things about it as
opposed to saying yeah they're suffering
and the commitment to live is a
commitment to suffer and we can commit
to pursue
positive goals positive achievements
positive change obviously including
ecology in my case that's that's high up
the ladder and dammit I'm gonna live and
I'm gonna fight for my daughter to live
and again there are limits I don't think
anybody should have nine kids my father
did and you know and there are I think
there are questions I think you can have
laws we already talked about this
whether it's Iran or China I mean I
think there really is a question about
how you how government policy ultimately
has to draw a line there are some people
in America with 30 kids you know one man
with multiple women and so on there are
I've seen documented cases of that that
exists we'll you know ultimately what is
the coercion whether the cutoff is at
for kids or three kids or two kids or
one or whatever you know what is what is
the point at which you have government
policies step in and say look this isn't
your decision anymore
before you were making a decision for
yourself but now you're making a
decision that impacts all of us too much
what we're you know we're stepping in
and saying you know what saying whatever
we're saying you know yeah obviously it
was recklessly responsible for my father
have 19 and it's something I debated
with them you know III talked about it I
mean his excuse this is his line of
reasoning so allegedly allegedly when he
had the first kid he didn't understand
contraception and he didn't understand
right allegedly there are a lot of
reasons why that story doesn't hold
water his proposed MA thesis was on
contraception in Hinduism before he had
children at all the timing of it the
timing of of when he but anyway he
claims when he had the first kid he had
no understanding of where babies come
from and how a contraception works and
it's like I'm pretty sure after you had
one two or three children the doctor
would have sat you down what somebody
your own mother somebody you you know
you were illiterate in the English
language again it's not only being
literate
only language is lotion you have no
access to a library there are people who
live in ignorance in this world and you
ain't one of them dad you ain't one of
them
you know I'm pretty sure somewhere
between kid number one and kid number
five even if the first pregnancy really
was out of like total ignorance of how
contraception works somewhere in the
first five kids the concept of
contraception would have would have
gotten across to you so II I mean it's
[ __ ] but he treated that like it was
a blanket you know excuse for the [ __ ]
in his life and it was part of what he
was covering up for he was he was a true
believer and a weird kind of
Christianity in Christian socialism
which I mean I think at that stage in
his life I think you could tie him down
and torture him and you couldn't get him
to be honest about what he believed what
he thought he was so it was so important
to him to lie to himself about that and
what role Christianity played in his
decision to have so many kids during one
brief time in his life and they're all
they're all kind of clustered together
you know yeah so look you know political
decisions make people into your enemies
you know it's sad but I think that's
true I think I can just kind of say that
but it's worth examining the advantages
and disadvantages of your your your
political views the philosophy you a dog
in terms of who does this who does this
make into my enemies who does this make
anyone you know I'm self-critical I can
look at decisions I've made and say well
because I take this position you know
because I take this position on refugee
policy a video now what my position is
some refugee policy I think I have a
moderate reasonable position but I can
recognize this makes some people into my
enemies and they they you know yell me
about it but I mean if your if your
position is one that does make people
people to make the decision to have one
child into your enemies people are
decision about two children into your
enemies I think you have a deeply deeply
flawed political position and again I
encourage all of you to work from the
bottom up if you want to live in a
society that's in in demographic
collapse or people are having fewer and
fewer children go to Japan you you have
a choice and you you can look at the
advantages and disadvantages of that and
Japan's accomplishing it without without
a one-child policy like China has you
can come to China you can study the real
political history
variants of countries like China in
around that's a wrap
yeah that's a wrap a bonus yen